Electrodialysis- Bipolar - 1D (#1554)
watertap-org/watertap: docs/technical_reference/unit_models/electrodialysis_bipolar_1D.rst

Bipolar Electrodialysis (1D)
============================

Introduction
------------

Bipolar electrodialysis, an electrochemical separation technology, is primarily used to generate acids and bases

> from waste salts. Recently, multiple proof of concept studies have also shown that starting from Lithium Chloride solution bipolar membranes can produce Lithium Hydroxide.

Reviewer: I can't clearly conceptualize "waste salts" .  I would expect citations of lithium chloride treatment if you say "multiple proof of concept studies".

Reviewer 2: I think waste salt streams largely refer to the reject streams from other desalination processes like, for example, RO. BPED would be a way to reuse that "waste" stream and get some useful product(s) out of it. I think this detail and, as mentioned, at least maybe 3 citations for the papers, can be added.

Author: Rewrote the intro. Now called 'concentrated salt solution'. 

Good point. Added more citations.

Author: @fahim831 Issues addressed in rewrite

> These are critical for batteries. In water treatment plants starting with waste brine, at the end of water purification, yields high concentrations sodium hydroxide.

Reviewer: Check grammar and clarity of the sentence starting "In water treatment plants..."

Author: Rewrote the intro. Should be clearer now.

These can be new revenue streams. To produce products from salts there is a cation exchange memrbane (CEM) and a anion exchange membrane (AEM) in parallel with the bipolar membrane.

> This model uses bipolar membrane model that accounts for catalyst action developed by Mareev et al. (2020) and Melnikov (2022). Users may choose to add ions via the feed. Combining with the AEM and CEM this unit model predicts brine purification as well as acid and base production. This unit can be deployed in a flowsheet to determine the optimal operating conditions by using the costing features in WaterTAP. A sketch of the bipolar membrane cell stack is shown in Figure 1 with the **diluate**, **basic**, and **acidic** channels, that produce base and acid respectively. More overview of the bipolar electrodialysis technology can be found in the *References*.

Reviewer: Please recollect my comment from the previous PR on the two references (Mareev and Melnikov)-  I can't figure out what in this PR "accounts for" what "catalyst action" developed in the two works.  The two works appear in different schemes to me and they focused on solving PDE to account for electrical potential and space charge, which I don't find in this PR.

Reviewer 2: Comma after first appearance of "salts", typo (memrbane) before CEM acronym, "an" anion exchange membrane. Comma after "Combining with the AEM and CEM" and perhaps "Combined" is more correct. In the second-to-last sentence, 3 things are mentioned and then 2 at the end with "respectively", which doesn't align. It should be 2+2 or 3+3 to match. I think it can be changed to "low concentration brine, base, and acid, respectively."

Author: I think I finally understand what you meant. Now the text clarifies that a reduced order model for hydrolysis developed by Mareev is being used.

Reviewer: It is possibly that (1) your model involved the derivation of new equations that have not been reported in previous works, or (2) otherwise.  If it is case (1), it'd be essential to show some derivation and theoretical basis.  If it is case (2), it'd be favorable to let a reader easily find the source of the equations.  When I opened the cited literature, I could not identify equations that were used in this model. If you are citing equations from multiple papers and integrate them into this model, maybe it's helpful to show the citation of each equation and basics of the integration.

Author: I have lots of notes to table 3. Hopefully this will clear this up.

But TLDR is while I didn't derive anything new I did stitch together equations from different places. Let me know if the new presentation is still unclear.

Author: @fahim831 Good catches! Fixed now.

Reviewer: I couldn't find "equation (22) in Wilhelm et al. (2001)." The equation where the citation is placed appears to be entirely different from "equation (16) in Mareev et al. (2020)." ... These are just two examples, and I have not reviewed every equation citation in detail.

I reserve my previous comment. I do not fully understand the difference between "derive" and "stitch together equations" in your statement and, therefore, cannot confidently validate the theoretical basis.

That said, the code runs well, and I do not see any significant issues. I will leave my review as is and defer the decision on approval to the team.

Author: @lbibl Oops, I mixed up the equations for Mareev et al. (2020). Fixed it. 

Regarding the other equations. Getting the equations I use, for example from Melnikov (2022), does require the reader to spend some effort. They are not verbatim copied from literature but not such a big leap to call it a new derivation. 
In the latest update I have tried to mitigate it somewhat by adding some extra references (Gonalez et al. (2023) to supplement Wilhelm et al. (2001)) and rewording the description. 
But I don't know how to comprehensively address this issue for ALL the equations. 

To your general comment: I have re-written the doc a bit. However, I don't know how to address this issue. Maybe it is familiarity due to staring at my own work for so long.

.. figure:: ../../_static/unit_models/BPEDdiagram.png
    :width: 600
    :align: center

    Figure 1. Schematic representation of a bipolar electrodialysis unit

One bipolar membrane along with the **diluate**, **basic**, and **acidic** channels can thus be treated as a modelling unit that can
multiply to larger-scale systems. The presented bipolar electrodialysis model establishes mathematical descriptions of
ion and water transport across the membrane along with water splitting. Modelled transfer mechanisms include
electrical migration, diffusion of ions, osmosis, electroosmosis, and water splitting. The following are the key
assumptions made:

* The **diluate**, **basic**, and **acidic** channels have identical geometry.

> * For each channel, component fluxes in the bulk solution has variation along the vertical direction (l), as depicted in in Figure 1, but uniform in the other two orthogonal directions, b (cell width) and d, (the 1-dimensional assumption).

Reviewer: I don't think this is accurate. I think the charge carrier species vary over the horizontal coordinate.

Author: This is a paraphrase from the ED-1D documentation (taken from key assumption). I am not sure that this part has changed between the ED and Bipolar ED.

Reviewer 3: Given that this is a 1D model, and based on your current formulation and analysis, is it fair to say that while charge carrier species would vary across the horizontal coordinates, this model only considers variation over vertical coordinates? @lbibl is this the same assumption as in ED-1D, and if so, do you think this BPED-1D needs a different assumption?

Also, d is labeled in the diagram while b is not. Should you also write the following?
```suggestion
* For each channel, component fluxes in the bulk solution has variation along the vertical direction (l), as depicted in in Figure 1, but uniform in the other two orthogonal directions, b (cell width) and d (channel width), (the 1-dimensional assumption).
```

* Steady state: all variables are independent of time.
* Co-current flow operation. 
* Ideality assumptions: activity, osmotic, and van't Hoff coefficients are set at one.

> * All ion-exchange membrane properties (ion and water transport number, resistance, permeability) are constant.

Reviewer: constant over time or space?  At least resistance varies in space.

Reviewer 2: Since neither the "Electrode areal resistance" nor the "Membrane areal resistance" are indexed by space, I believe neither varies in space at the moment. The former may vary with time in a dynamic model as it's indexed by [t], though.

Author: Missed it in the update to resistance. Has been removed now.

Author: @fahim831 This was a typo. Electrode areal resistance is not assumed to have time dependence. Fixed.

* Detailed concentration gradient effect at membrane-water interfaces is neglected. 
* Constant pressure and temperature through each channel.

> * No boundary layer, electric double layer or diffusion layer, has been considered. For typical operating conditions of a bipolar membrane system such low salinity in the **diluate** is not expected.

Reviewer: If no diffusion layer, why is there a calculation of limiting current density based on diffusion?

Author: Yep. Removed the reference to bipolar membrane. Only the monopolar membranes do not have boundary layers.

Reviewer: then what exactly is causing the limiting current ?  I think it's related to where is the equation for calculating i_lim in your later table from

Author: I have added more notes to table 3.

TLDR is the limiting current occurs because of a competition between electrical migration and diffusion. Wilhelm (2001) has a section showing the derivation.

This unit model works with the MCAS property model.

.. csv-table:: **Table 1.** List of Set
   :header: "Description", "Symbol", "Indices"

   "Time", ":math:`t`", "[t] ([0])\ :sup:`1`"
   "Length_domain", ":math:`x`", ":math:`l \times(0, 1)` \ :sup:`2`"
   "Phase", ":math:`p`", "['Liq']"
   "Component", ":math:`j`", "['H\ :sub:`2` \O', 'Na\ :sup:`+`', 'Cl\ :sup:`-`', 'H\ :sup:`+`', 'OH\ :sup:`-`']"
   "Ion", ":math:`j`", "['Na\ :sup:`+`', 'Cl\ :sup:`-`', 'H\ :sup:`+`', 'OH\ :sup:`-`'] \  :sup:`3`"
   "Membrane", "n/a", "['AEM','CEM','BPEM']"

**Notes**
 :sup:`1` The time set index is set as [0] in this steady-state model and is reserved majorly for the future extension
 to a dynamic model.

 :sup:`2` By the IDAES convention, the index of length_domain is normalized to a continuous set of (0, 1), which is discretized
 when differential equations in the model are solved by numerical methods such as "finite difference" discretization. In this
 documentation, :math:`x` refers to the length dimension before normalization and carries a unit of [m].

 :sup:`3` "Ion" is a subset of "Component" and uses the same symbol j.

> Degrees of Freedom

Reviewer: Are there no degrees of freedom related to water splitting?  I wound find this doubtful.

Author: Combined the DOF tables. Should have water splitting DOFs here.

------------------
The bipolar membrane model has multiple degrees of freedom, among which temperature, pressure, and component molar flow
rate are state variables that are fixed as initial conditions. The rest are parameters that should be provided in order
to fully solve the model. The exact degrees of freedom depend on the mode of operation. For the simplest case where no water
splitting occurs and the bipolar membrane acts like a simple electrodialysis membrane these are:

.. csv-table:: **Table 2.** List of Degree of Freedom (DOF)
   :header: "Description", "Symbol", "Variable Name", "Index", "Units", "DOF Number \ :sup:`1`"

   "Temperature, inlet_diluate", ":math:`T^{diluate}`", "temperature", "None", ":math:`K`", 1
   "Temperature, inlet_acidic", ":math:`T^{acidic}`", "temperature", "None", ":math:`K`", 1
   "Temperature, inlet_basic", ":math:`T^{basic}`", "temperature", "None", ":math:`K`", 1
   "Pressure, inlet_diluate",":math:`p^{diluate}`", "temperature", "None", ":math:`Pa`", 1
   "Pressure, inlet_acidic",":math:`p^{acidic}`", "temperature", "None", ":math:`Pa`", 1
   "Pressure, inlet_basic",":math:`p^{basic}`", "temperature", "None", ":math:`Pa`", 1

>    "Component molar flow rate, inlet_diluate", ":math:`N_{j,in}^{diluate}`", "flow_mol_phase_comp", "[t], ['Liq'], ['H\ :sub:`2`\O', 'Na\ :sup:`+`', '\Cl\ :sup:`-`', 'H\ :sup:`+`', 'OH\ :sup:`-`']", ":math:`mol \, s^{-1}`", 5

Reviewer: why are these molar flow rate not indexed by x if it is 1-d?

Reviewer 2: Why is not a single row in the table indexed by [x] if it's a 1D model?

Author: This is again taken from the ED-1D docs. Not sure what would cause it to be different.

Reviewer: If this model stands independently, it does not necessarily need to conform to another model as a standard.  Additionally, other models may contain unidentified errors, and, as open-sourced models, they are open to anyone to debug .  The question here is whether your variable is indexed by x, which should be determined by the content of the current model itself.

Author: Looking into it further I don't believe this needs an x index. N_{j,in}^{diluate} is the inlet flow. This is just saying the user sets the inlet conditions. 

This would be true for the ED-1D model too.

Reviewer 3: One thing to note is that some of these are properties that wouldn't be indexed by x because they live on stateblocks, and it is the stateblocks that would be indexed by time and space.

Author: @fahim831 In addition to what Adam said, all of the variables listed in the table are what the user would specify. We expect the user to supply inlet flow, pressure, dimensions of the membrane, and other such quantities. Those that vary along the length of the channel (like concentration profile or current density along x) are expected to be computed rather than specified. Hence variables with'x' index are not placed in the DOF table. 
Of course due to the equation based modelling of WaterTAP advanced users could attempt the latter. But a user advanced enough to attempt that does not need this table.

Reviewer 2: @johnson12742 Thanks for clarifying. That and Adam's comments make sense.

            ("Liq", "H_+"): 9.31e-9,
            ("Liq", "OH_-"): 5.27e-9,
        },
    }

This model, by default, uses H\ :sub:`2`\ O  as the solvent of the feed solution. Please note that H\ :sup:`+` and OH\ :sup:`-` information must be supplied. Otherwise an error will be thrown.

Information regarding the property package this unit model relies on can be found here: 

:py:mod:`watertap.property_models.ion_DSPMDE_prop_pack`

Equations
---------

This model solves mass balances of all solution components (H\ :sub:`2`\ O, Na :sup:`+`, \Cl :sup:`-` H\ :sup:`+` and OH\ :sup:`-` ) on three control volumes (acidic, basic, and diluate channels). Under the 1D treatment, balance equations are expressed
as differential algebraic equations (DAE) when concerned variables are functions of length (x). The DAEs are solved in a
discretization manner using the "finite difference" or "collocation" method implemented in **Pyomo.DAE**.

The flux equations are summarized in **Table3** and the mass balance given in **Table4** . Further details on these can be found in the *References*.

.. csv-table:: **Table 3** Flux Equations
   :header: "Description", "Equation", "Index set"

>    "mass transfer flux, BPEM, solute", ":math:`J^{BPEM}_j(x) = t_j^{BPEM}\frac{\xi i_{lim}(x)}{ z_j F}`", ":math:`j \in \left['{Na^+} ', '{Cl^-} '\right]`"

Reviewer: Should there be an explanation on what it is always i_lim? Does it operate always in an over-limiting current regime ?

Author: Expanded the explanation. Is the new text clearer?

   "mass transfer flux, BPEM, H\ :sub:`2`\ O", ":math:`J^{BPEM}_j(x) = t_w^{BPEM} \left(\frac{i(x)}{F}\right)+\left(L^{BPEM} \right)\left(p_{osm}^{acidic}(x)-p_{osm}^{basic}(x) \right)\left(\frac{\rho_w}{M_w}\right)`", ":math:`j \in \left['H_2 O'\right]`"
   "Water disassociation flux, BPEM, water ions", ":math:`J^{BPEM}_j (x)= J_{diss}(x)`", ":math:`j \in \left['{H^+}, {OH^-}  '\right]`"

>    "Water disassociation flux, BPEM,  H\ :sub:`2`\ O", ":math:`J^{BPEM}_j(x) = -0.5 J_{diss}(x)`", ":math:`j \in \left['H_2 O'\right]`"

Reviewer: It's difficult for me to quickly find a theoretical basis of this equation.

Author: Rewrote the presentation of equations. Please let me know if it is still unclear.

   "mass transfer flux, CEM, solute", ":math:`J^{AEM}_j(x) = \left(t_j^{AEM} \right)\frac{\xi i(x)}{ z_j F}-\frac{D_j^{AEM}}{\delta ^{AEM} }\left(c_j^{acidic}(x)-c_j^{diluate}(x) \right)`", ":math:`j \in \left['{Na^+} ', '{Cl^-} '\right]`"
   "mass transfer flux, AEM, H\ :sub:`2`\ O", ":math:`J^{AEM}_j(x) = t_w^{AEM} \left(\frac{i(x)}{F}\right)+\left(L^{AEM} \right)\left(p_{osm}^{acidic}(x)-p_{osm}^{diluate}(x) \right)\left(\frac{\rho_w}{M_w}\right)`", ":math:`j \in \left['H_2 O'\right]`"

>    "Water disassociation flux, AEM, water ions", ":math:`J^{AEM}_j(x) = 0`", ":math:`j \in \left['{H^+}, {OH^-}  '\right]`"

Reviewer: It's confusing to have the same label for water dissociation flux and mass transfer flux...

Author: Renamed variables

   "mass transfer flux, CEM, H\ :sub:`2`\ O", ":math:`J^{CEM}_j(x) = t_w^{CEM} \left(\frac{i(x)}{F}\right)+\left(L^{CEM} \right)\left(p_{osm}^{basic}(x)-p_{osm}^{diluate}(x) \right)\left(\frac{\rho_w}{M_w}\right)`", ":math:`j \in \left['H_2 O'\right]`"
   "Water disassociation flux, CEM, water ions", ":math:`J^{CEM}_j (x)= 0`", ":math:`j \in \left['{H^+}, {OH^-}  '\right]`"
   "Water disassociation flux, CEM,  H\ :sub:`2`\ O", ":math:`J^{CEM}_j(x) = 0`", ":math:`j \in \left['H_2 O'\right]`"

.. csv-table:: **Table 4** Mass balance equations
   :header: "Description", "Equation", "Index set"

   "Mass balance **basic** channel", ":math:`\left(\frac{\partial N_j (x)}{\partial x}\right)^{\bf{basic}}+(J_j(x)^{BPEM} + J_j(x)^{CEM} ) b=0`", ":math:`j \in \left['H_2 O', '{Na^+} ', '{Cl^-}, '{H^+} ', '{OH^-} '\right]`"
   "Mass balance **acidic** channel", ":math:`\left(\frac{\partial N_j (x)}{\partial x}\right)^{\bf{acidic}}+(J_j(x)^{BPEM} + J_j(x)^{AEM} ) b=0`", ":math:`j \in \left['H_2 O', '{Na^+} ', '{Cl^-}, '{H^+} ', '{OH^-} '\right]`"

>    "Mass balance **diluate** channel", ":math:`\left(\frac{\partial N_j (x)}{\partial x}\right)^{\bf{diluate}}-(J_j(x)^{AEM} + J_j(x)^{CEM} ) b=0`", ":math:`j \in \left['H_2 O', '{Na^+} ', '{Cl^-}, '{H^+} ', '{OH^-} '\right]`"

Reviewer: you may wanna clarify the positive direction of flux. It seems that you defined different positive direction in different channels, which is not recommended.

Author: I have written down the sign convention. Unfortunately I think it will be clunky to have one consistent sign convention.

The flux from water splitting with catalyst action as well as the limiting current are shown in **Table 5**

.. csv-table:: **Table 5** Essential equations
   :header: "Description", "Equation"

   "Limiting current density", ":math:`i_{lim} =` user input constant", "``limiting_current_density_method_bpem =LimitingCurrentDensitybpemMethod.InitialValue``"
   " ", ":math:`i_{lim} = D^*F (C_{acidic,NaCl}+C_{basic,NaCl})^2 / (\sigma \delta)`", "``limiting_current_density_method_bpem =LimitingCurrentDensitybpemMethod.Empirical``"
   "Water splitting flux", ":math:`J_{diss} =R_{K_A} \lambda + R_{K_B} \lambda`"
   "Water splitting rate", ":math:`R_{K_A/K_B} = \frac{Q_{m,A/B}}{K_{A/B}}[k_2(0)f(E)C_{H_2O} ]`"
   "Depletion length", ":math:`\lambda = E \epsilon_0 \epsilon_r / (F \sigma)`"
   "Electric current density", ":math:`i = i_{lim} + F J_{diss}`"

>    "Potential drop", ":math:`U=n E/\lambda + i r_{tot}`"

Reviewer: I can't easily find what is E, although I suspect it is the thermal potential of water splitting.  Generally,  I think you should make it fairly convenient for a user/reader to find or make sense of the theoretical basis of all equations.

Author: Added a note

**Note**
 :sup:`1` The diffusivity :math:`D^*` used here for the salt and should not be confused with the ion diffusivity.

Please note that since the unit model is assumed to operate in the water splitting regime and so :math:`i_{lim}` is always computed. :math:`f(E)` is the second Wien effect driven enhancement of the
dissociation rate under applied electric field. It requires as input temperature and relative permittivity (:math:`\epsilon_r`).The parameters used are given in **Table 6**.

> .. csv-table:: **Table 6.** DOF relevant for water disassociation

Reviewer: Oh, here is a second DOF table.  Why don't you put all DOFs together?

Author: I thought it would make it easier for the reader. Since it clearly is not I have merged the DOF tables.

   :header: "Description", "Symbol", "Variable Name", "Units"

   "Salt diffusivity", ":math:`D^*`", "diffus_mass", ":math:`m^2\, s^{-1}`"

>    "Salt concentration, basic side ", ":math:`C_{basic}`", "salt_conc_ael_ref/salt_conc_ael_x[t,x]",":math:`mol\, m^{-3}`"

Reviewer: confusing variable name... Why is there a fraction?

Author: Rewritten for clarity

   "Salt concentration, acidic side ", ":math:`C_{acidic}`", "salt_conc_cel_ref/salt_conc_cel_x[t,x]",":math:`mol \,m^{-3}`"

>    "Membrane Fixed charge ", ":math:`\sigma`", "membrane_fixed_charge",":math:`mol \,m^{-3}`"

Reviewer: Is this something practically determinable?

Author: Yes! Equation (24) from Wilhelm et al (2001) provides a way. Using this equation I was able to get the fixed charge for Abdiel expts in NMSU.

But it seems unnecessary to include this relationship in this PR.

   "Relative permittivity ", ":math:`\epsilon_r`", "relative_permittivity","Non-dimensional"
   "Catalyst concentration on the cation exchange side", ":math:`Q_{m,A}`", "membrane_fixed_catalyst_cel", ":math:`mol \, m^{-3}`"
   "Catalyst concentration on the anion exchange side", ":math:`Q_{m,B}`", "membrane_fixed_catalyst_ael", ":math:`mol \, m^{-3}`"
   "Equilibrium constant of proton disassociation", ":math:`K_A`", "k_a",":math:`mol \, m^{-3}`"
   "Equilibrium constant of hydroxide disassociation", ":math:`K_B`", "k_b",":math:`mol \, m^{-3}`"

**Note**

 :sup:`1` All the DOFs listed in this table have no index, unless explicitly specified.

 :sup:`2` The values of :math:`C_{acidic,NaCl}` and :math:`C_{basic,NaCl}` can either be user supplied by setting ``salt_calculation=False`` or computed by choosing ``salt_calculation=True``.

 :sup:`3` salt_conc_ael_ref and salt_conc_ael_ref need to be specified only when ``salt_calculation=False`` is chosen.

 :sup:`4` When ``salt_calculation=True`` :math:`C_{basic}` and :math:`C_{acidic}` salt_conc_ael_x and salt_conc_cel_x are computed with indexes [t,x].

> The model used here is based on the analysis by Mareev et al. (2020). It and has been validated using the experimental data on bipolar membrane information available in Wilhelm et al. (2002). Additionaly inputs were obtained from Mareev et al. (2020).

Reviewer: Please refer to my comment on such claim in the previous closed PR.

Author: Updated the text to better reflect what I am borrowing from these works

            ("Liq", "OH_-"): 5.27e-9,
        },
    }

This model, by default, uses H\ :sub:`2`\ O  as the solvent of the feed solution. Please note that H\ :sup:`+` and OH\ :sup:`-` information must be supplied. Otherwise an error will be thrown.

Information regarding the property package this unit model relies on can be found here: 

:py:mod:`watertap.property_models.ion_DSPMDE_prop_pack`

Equations
---------

This model solves mass balances of all solution components (H\ :sub:`2`\ O, Na :sup:`+`, \Cl :sup:`-` H\ :sup:`+` and OH\ :sup:`-` ) on three control volumes (acidic, basic, and diluate channels). Under the 1D treatment, balance equations are expressed
as differential algebraic equations (DAE) when concerned variables are functions of length (x). The DAEs are solved in a
discretization manner using the "finite difference" or "collocation" method implemented in **Pyomo.DAE**.

To create a model for bipolar electrodialysis we use the mass transfer equations from conventional electrodialysis on the CEM and AEM
(for further details please refer to :py:mod:`watertap.unit_models.electrodialysis_1D`) and couple it with equations developed for BPEM.

> Across the BPEM water disassociation occurs when the limiting current is exceeded. Assuming the unit model is operated in the hydrolysis regime the current density consists of

Reviewer 2: Comma after "Across the BPEM"

Author: Fixed

the limiting current and the water splitting current. See equation (3) in  Wilhelm et al. (2001) [7]_ or equations (11) and (12) from González et al. (2023) [13]_ for further details.
The limiting current density is obtained from González et al. (2023) [13]_. It sets the amount of salt ions flowing across the BPEM. The governing equations for catalyst induced

> water disassociation is derived from by model proposed by Mareev et al. (2020) [5]_. The equations pertaining to the BPEM have been presented in **Table 3**.

Reviewer 2: "from by model" means?

Author: Typo. Corrected now.

.. csv-table:: **Table 3** Essential equations across BPEM
   :header: "Description", "Equation"

   "Limiting current density", ":math:`i_{lim}(x) =` user input constant", "``limiting_current_density_method_bpem =LimitingCurrentDensitybpemMethod.InitialValue``"
   "", ":math:`i_{lim} (x) = D^*F (C_{acidic,NaCl}(x)+C_{basic,NaCl}(x))^2 / (\sigma \delta)`", "``limiting_current_density_method_bpem =LimitingCurrentDensitybpemMethod.Empirical`` \ :sup:`2`"
   "Water splitting flux \ :sup:`3`", ":math:`S_{diss}(x) =R_{K_A} \lambda(x) + R_{K_B} \lambda(x)`"

>    "Water splitting rate \ :sup:`4`", ":math:`R_{K_A/K_B}(x) = \frac{Q_{m,A/B}}{K_{A/B}}[k_2(0)f[E(x)]C_{H_2O} ]`"

Reviewer 2: Assuming the R_{K_A} and R_{K_B} are the F[kd*B]c_H2O and F[kd*A]c_H2O terms in Eq (35) of Mareev, 2 questions:
1. Is the notation R_{K_A/K_B} supposed to mean the ratio of R_{K_A} to R_{K_B} or some new variable R_{K_A/K_B} and, if so, how is R_{K_A/K_B} relevant?
2. How is the Q/K... equation above for R_{K_A/K_B} derived? The ratio of k* I can trace back to equations 20-22 in Mareev but I can't find the Q/K... relation.

Author: @fahim831 They are two variables  R_{K_A} and  R_{K_B}. I was trying to be compact. But it looks like it gives a misleading impression. Expanded the expressions for clarity.

* No boundary layer, electric double layer or diffusion layer, next to the monopolar membranes has been considered. For typical operating conditions of a bipolar membrane system such low salinity in the **diluate** is not expected.
* All instances of limiting current density, unless explicitly specified, refer to salt ion limiting current density across BPEM.
* The hydrolysis limiting current on BPEM is expected to be much higher and does not have a suitable model in literature. Hence not included in the unit model.

Control Volumes
---------------

This model has three control volumes for the acidic and basic channels.

* **diluate** channel
* **acidic** channel
* **basic** channel

Ports
-----

On the two control volumes, this model provides four ports (Pyomo notation in parenthesis):

* inlet_diluate (inlet)
* outlet_diluate (outlet)
* inlet_acidic (inlet)
* outlet_acidic (outlet)
* inlet_basic (inlet)
* outlet_basic (outlet)

Sets
----
This model can simulate the water splitting and the transport of multiple species. All solution components
( H\ :sub:`2`\ O, neutral solutes, and ions, including Proton and Hydroxide ion) form a Pyomo set in the model.

> For a clear model demonstration, this document uses a NaCl water solution along with the products of water splitting, H\ :sup:`+` and OH\ :sup:`-`, hereafter.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For a clear model demonstration, this document uses an aqueous NaCl solution along with the products of water splitting, H\ :sup:`+` and OH\ :sup:`-`, hereafter.
```

This model can mathematically take a multi-component (i.e., one salt molecule to be treated) as an input; nevertheless

> a multi-component solution creates unknown or difficult-to-specify parameters, e.g., the electrical transport numbers through membranes,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
a multi-component solution introduces parameters that are either unknown or difficult to estimate (e.g., electrical transport numbers through membranes,
```

> the multi-ion diffusivity, etc., and physical relationships, which may result in ill-posed or ill-conditioned problems challenging the models'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
multi-ion diffusivity, etc.) and physical relationships that may result in ill-posed or ill-conditioned problems, translating to numerical challenges that can make models difficult to solve.'
```

> numerical solutions.  While we continuously work on advancing our models to absorb new principles revealed by progressing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While we continuously work on advancing our models to incorporate new principles revealed by new
```

> research, we advise the users be very **cautious** with simulating multi-component system by this programmed model for aspects stated above.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
research findings, we advise users to be **cautious** when simulating multi-component systems with the current model, due to the aspects stated above.
```

This unit model works with the MCAS property model.

.. csv-table:: **Table 1.** List of Set
   :header: "Description", "Symbol", "Indices"

   "Time", ":math:`t`", "[t] ([0])\ :sup:`1`"
   "Length_domain", ":math:`x`", ":math:`l \times(0, 1)` \ :sup:`2`"
   "Phase", ":math:`p`", "['Liq']"
   "Component", ":math:`j`", "['H\ :sub:`2` \O', 'Na\ :sup:`+`', 'Cl\ :sup:`-`', 'H\ :sup:`+`', 'OH\ :sup:`-`']"

>    "Ion", ":math:`j`", "['Na\ :sup:`+`', 'Cl\ :sup:`-`', 'H\ :sup:`+`', 'OH\ :sup:`-`'] \  :sup:`3`"

Reviewer 3: I am guessing that if any of these ions are not defined in MCAS before passing to the unit model, the unit model will raise an exception, stating that these ions are required for the model. Is that the case? If so, then that might be the most critical note that you want to include here; i.e., these ions are required for the model to work and must be included in the solute_list for MCAS.

Reviewer 3: I guess my other question is--assuming these ions are all required--can the user add any other ions or solutes to the list? Or does the model expect these ions and nothing more than these ions?

Author: yes, they will raise an error. I have added that note (in two places).

It can take other ions. But the areal resistance calculation will be off. I have added a note about that.

   "Membrane", "n/a", "['AEM','CEM','BPEM']"

**Notes**

>  :sup:`1` The time set index is set as [0] in this steady-state model and is reserved majorly for the future extension

Reviewer 3: the time set index should correspond to that of the flowsheet and not be hard-coded to 0, even if a time index of 0 is only used because only a steady state model has been worked on. So maybe you should remove `([0])` from the table entry for time indices

Author: I removed the reference to zero

Bipolar Electrodialysis (1D)
============================

Introduction
------------

Bipolar electrodialysis, an electrochemical separation technology, is primarily used to generate acids and bases from concentrated salt solution [1]_.

> Recently, multiple proof of concept studies have shown that starting from Lithium Chloride solution bipolar membranes can produce Lithium Hydroxide [2]_ [3]_.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Recently, multiple proof of concept studies have shown that, starting from Lithium Chloride solution, bipolar membranes can produce Lithium Hydroxide [2]_ [3]_.
```

> Environmentally hazardous concentrated brine, produced at the end of water purification, can be converted  to valuable sodium hydroxide via bipolar membrane electrodialysis, thus creating a new revenue stream [4]_.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Environmentally hazardous concentrated brine, produced at the end of water purification, can be converted to valuable sodium hydroxide via bipolar membrane electrodialysis, thus creating a new revenue stream [4]_.
```

> The bipolar membrane (BPEM) typically is made of an Anion exhcange layer and Cation exchange layer sandwiched together, usually with catalyst added to improve the hydrolysis reaction.

Reviewer 4: Is the BPEM acronym correct? I don't see where the E is coming from.. is it meant to be bipolar electrodialysis model (BPEM) bipolar membrane electrodialysis (BMED)?

> To produce products from salts the BPEM is placed in parallel with a cation exchange membrane (CEM) and an anion exchange membrane (AEM).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To produce products from salts, the BPEM is placed in parallel with a cation exchange membrane (CEM) and an anion exchange membrane (AEM).
```

> To obtain a model for bipolar electrodialysis we create a model from existing literature.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To obtain a model for bipolar electrodialysis, we create a model from existing literature.
```

> The unit model uses the reduced order model for water disassociation proposed by Mareev et al. (2020) [5]_. While their work primarily focuses on simulating potential profile within the bipolar membrane they also find

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The unit model uses the reduced order model for water disassociation proposed by Mareev et al. (2020) [5]_. While their work primarily focuses on simulating potential profile within the bipolar membrane, they also find
```

> reasonably good agreements with the voltage-current experiments performed by Wilhelm et al. (2002) [6]_. Hence the Mareev et al. (2020) [5]_ framework for hydrolysis flux that incorporates catalyst action is used.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
reasonably good agreements with the voltage-current experiments performed by Wilhelm et al. (2002) [6]_. Hence, the Mareev et al. (2020) [5]_ framework for hydrolysis flux that incorporates catalyst action is used.
```

> Water splitting occurs only when the limiting current on the BPEM is exceeded. An expression for the limiting current is obtained from existing literature [7]_ [13]_. These two components are coupled using best available model for current density [7]_ [13]_.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Water splitting occurs only when the limiting current on the BPEM is exceeded. An expression for the limiting current is obtained from existing literature [7]_ [13]_. These two components are coupled using the best available model for current density [7]_ [13]_.
```

Combining the BPEM with the AEM and CEM, this unit model can be deployed to model acid and base production from concentrated salt solutions. The mass transfer is modelled using rigorously validated conventional electrodialysis equations.

> Hence high fidelity prediction of bipolar electrodialysis process will be possible with this unit model.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Hence, high fidelity prediction of bipolar electrodialysis process will be possible with this unit model.
```

> A sketch of the bipolar membrane cell stack is shown in Figure 1 with the **diluate**, **basic**, and **acidic** channels, that produce low concentration brine, base, and acid respectively.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A sketch of the bipolar membrane cell stack is shown in Figure 1 with the **diluate**, **basic**, and **acidic** channels that produce low concentration brine, base, and acid, respectively.
```

.. figure:: ../../_static/unit_models/BPEDdiagram.png
    :width: 600
    :align: center

    Figure 1. Schematic representation of a bipolar electrodialysis unit

One set of BPEM, CEM, AEM, along with the **diluate**, **basic**, and **acidic** channels can thus be treated as a modelling unit that can
multiply to larger-scale systems. The presented bipolar electrodialysis model establishes mathematical descriptions of
ion and water transport across the membrane along with water disassociation. Modelled transfer mechanisms include
electrical migration, diffusion of ions, osmosis, electroosmosis, and water splitting. The following are the key
assumptions made:

* The **diluate**, **basic**, and **acidic** channels have identical geometry.
* For each channel, component fluxes in the bulk solution has variation along the vertical direction (l), as depicted in in Figure 1, but uniform in the other two orthogonal directions, b (cell width) and d, (the 1-dimensional assumption).
* Steady state: all variables are independent of time.
* Co-current flow operation. 
* Ideality assumptions: activity, osmotic, and van't Hoff coefficients are set at one.

> * Ion and water transport number, permeability are constant over space.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Ion transport number, water transport number, and permeability are constant over space.
```

* Detailed concentration gradient effect at membrane-water interfaces is neglected. 
* Constant pressure and temperature through each channel.

> * No boundary layer, electric double layer or diffusion layer, next to the monopolar membranes has been considered. For typical operating conditions of a bipolar membrane system such low salinity in the **diluate** is not expected.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* No boundary layer, electric double layer, or diffusion layer next to the monopolar membranes has been considered. For typical operating conditions of a bipolar membrane system, such low salinity in the **diluate** is not expected.
```

* All instances of limiting current density, unless explicitly specified, refer to salt ion limiting current density across BPEM.

> * The hydrolysis limiting current on BPEM is expected to be much higher and does not have a suitable model in literature. Hence not included in the unit model.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* The hydrolysis limiting current on BPEM is expected to be much higher and does not have a suitable model in literature. Hence, it is not included in the unit model.
```

Control Volumes
---------------

This model has three control volumes for the acidic and basic channels.

* **diluate** channel
* **acidic** channel
* **basic** channel

Ports
-----

> On the two control volumes, this model provides four ports (Pyomo notation in parenthesis):

Reviewer 4: Four ports?

* inlet_diluate (inlet)
* outlet_diluate (outlet)
* inlet_acidic (inlet)
* outlet_acidic (outlet)
* inlet_basic (inlet)
* outlet_basic (outlet)

Sets
----
This model can simulate the water splitting and the transport of multiple species. All solution components

> ( H\ :sub:`2`\ O, neutral solutes, and ions, including Proton and Hydroxide ion) form a Pyomo set in the model.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
( H\ :sub:`2`\ O, neutral solutes, and ions, including Proton and Hydroxide ions) form a Pyomo set in the model.
```

For a clear model demonstration, this document uses an aqueous NaCl solution along with the products of water splitting, H\ :sup:`+` and OH\ :sup:`-`, hereafter.

> This model can mathematically take a multi-component (i.e., one salt molecule to be treated) as an input; nevertheless

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This model can mathematically take a multi-component solution (i.e., one salt molecule to be treated) as an input; nevertheless,
```

a multi-component solution introduces parameters that are either unknown or difficult to estimate (e.g., electrical transport numbers through membranes,
multi-ion diffusivity, etc.) and physical relationships that may result in ill-posed or ill-conditioned problems, translating to numerical challenges that can make models difficult to solve.'
While we continuously work on advancing our models to incorporate new principles revealed by new
research findings, we advise users to be **cautious** when simulating multi-component systems with the current model, due to the aspects stated above.

> This unit model works with the MCAS property model.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This unit model works with the :ref:`MCAS <mcas_tech_ref>` property model.
```
This adds a hyperlink to the MCAS property model documentation

> .. csv-table:: **Table 1.** List of Set

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

Sets
----
.. csv-table:: 
```
Should change this to be consistent with other unit model documentation

   :header: "Description", "Symbol", "Indices"

>    "Time", ":math:`t`", "[t])\ :sup:`1`"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   "Time", ":math:`t`", "[t]\ :sup:`1`"
```

>    "Length_domain", ":math:`x`", ":math:`l \times(0, 1)` \ :sup:`2`"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   "Length domain", ":math:`x`", ":math:`l \times(0, 1)` \ :sup:`2`"
```

 when differential equations in the model are solved by numerical methods such as "finite difference" discretization. In this
 documentation, :math:`x` refers to the length dimension before normalization and carries a unit of [m].

 :sup:`3` "Ion" is a subset of "Component" and uses the same symbol j.

 :sup:`4` Please note that Na :sup:`+`, \Cl :sup:`-` H\ :sup:`+` and OH\ :sup:`-` information must be supplied. Otherwise an error will be thrown.

 :sup:`5` Additional ions can be added by the user and will not throw errors. However, areal resistance calculation assumes NaOH and HCl in the acid and base concentration. Hence, calculations will not be accurate unless users manually correct for areal resistance computation.

Degrees of Freedom
------------------
The bipolar membrane model has multiple degrees of freedom, among which temperature, pressure, and component molar flow
rate are state variables that are fixed as initial conditions. The rest are parameters that should be provided in order
to fully solve the model. The exact degrees of freedom depend on the mode of operation. For the simplest case where no water

> splitting occurs and the bipolar membrane acts like a simple electrodialysis membrane these are:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
splitting occurs and the bipolar membrane acts like a simple electrodialysis membrane ,these degrees of freedom are:
```

> .. csv-table:: **Table 2.** List of Degree of Freedom (DOF)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.. csv-table:: 
```

   "Component molar flow rate, inlet_acidic", ":math:`N_{j,in}^{acidic}`", "flow_mol_phase_comp", "[t], ['Liq'], ['H\ :sub:`2`\O', 'Na\ :sup:`+`', '\Cl\ :sup:`-`', 'H\ :sup:`+`', 'OH\ :sup:`-`']", ":math:`mol \, s^{-1}`", 5
   "Component molar flow rate, inlet_basic", ":math:`N_{j, in}^{basic}`", "flow_mol_phase_comp", "[t], ['Liq'], ['H\ :sub:`2`\O', 'Na\ :sup:`+`', '\Cl\ :sup:`-`', 'H\ :sup:`+`', 'OH\ :sup:`-`']", ":math:`mol \, s^{-1}`", 5
   "Water transport number", ":math:`t_w`", "water_trans_number_membrane", "['AEM','CEM','BPEM']", "dimensionless", 3
   "Water permeability", ":math:`L`", "water_permeability_membrane", "['AEM','CEM','BPEM']", ":math:`m^{-1}s^{-1}Pa^{-1}`", 3
   "Voltage or Current \ :sup:`2`", ":math:`U` or :math:`I`", "voltage or current", "[t]", ":math:`\text{V}` or :math:`A`", 1
   "Electrode areal resistance", ":math:`r_{el}`", "electrodes_resistance", "None", ":math:`\Omega \,m^2`", 1
   "Cell number", ":math:`n`", "cell_triplet_num", "None", "dimensionless", 1
   "Current utilization coefficient", ":math:`\xi`", "current_utilization", "None", "dimensionless", 1
   "Shadow factor", ":math:`\beta`", "shadow_factor", "None", "dimensionless", 1

>    "Spacer thickness", ":math:`s`", "spacer_thickness", "none", ":math:`m` ", 1

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   "Spacer thickness", ":math:`s`", "spacer_thickness", "None", ":math:`m` ", 1
```

   "Cell width", ":math:`b`", "cell_width", "None", ":math:`\text{m}`", 1
   "Cell length", ":math:`l`", "cell_length", "None", ":math:`\text{m}`", 1

>    "Channel height", ":math:`d`", "channel_height", "none", ":math:`m` ", 1

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   "Channel height", ":math:`d`", "channel_height", "None", ":math:`m` ", 1
```

   "Thickness of ion exchange membranes", ":math:`\delta`", "membrane_thickness", "['AEM','CEM','BPEM']", ":math:`m`", 3

>    "transport number of ions in the membrane phase", ":math:`t_j`", "ion_trans_number_membrane", "['AEM','CEM','BPEM'], ['Na\ :sup:`+`', '\Cl\ :sup:`-`', 'H\ :sup:`+`', 'OH\ :sup:`-`']", "dimensionless", 9

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   "Transport number of ions in the membrane phase", ":math:`t_j`", "ion_trans_number_membrane", "['AEM','CEM','BPEM'], ['Na\ :sup:`+`', '\Cl\ :sup:`-`', 'H\ :sup:`+`', 'OH\ :sup:`-`']", "dimensionless", 9
```

>    "diffusivity of solute in the membrane phase", ":math:`D`", "solute_diffusivity_membrane", "['AEM','CEM','BPEM'], ['Na\ :sup:`+`', '\Cl\ :sup:`-`', 'H\ :sup:`+`', 'OH\ :sup:`-`']", "dimensionless", 9

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   "Diffusivity of solute in the membrane phase", ":math:`D`", "solute_diffusivity_membrane", "['AEM','CEM','BPEM'], ['Na\ :sup:`+`', '\Cl\ :sup:`-`', 'H\ :sup:`+`', 'OH\ :sup:`-`']", "dimensionless", 9
```

------------------------------
To fully construct solution properties, users need to provide basic component information of the feed solution to use this model. Below is a sample:

.. code-block::

   ion_dict = {
        "solute_list": ["Na_+", "Cl_-", "H_+", "OH_-"],
        "mw_data": {
            "Na_+": 23e-3,
            "Cl_-": 35.5e-3,
            "H_+": 1e-3,
            "OH_-": 17.0e-3,
        },
        "elec_mobility_data": {
            ("Liq", "Na_+"): 5.19e-8,
            ("Liq", "Cl_-"): 7.92e-8,
            ("Liq", "H_+"): 36.23e-8,
            ("Liq", "OH_-"): 20.64e-8,
        },
        "charge": {"Na_+": 1, "Cl_-": -1, "H_+": 1, "OH_-": -1},
        "diffusivity_data": {
            ("Liq", "Na_+"): 1.33e-9,
            ("Liq", "Cl_-"): 2.03e-9,
            ("Liq", "H_+"): 9.31e-9,
            ("Liq", "OH_-"): 5.27e-9,
        },
    }

This model, by default, uses H\ :sub:`2`\ O  as the solvent of the feed solution. Please note that Na :sup:`+`, \Cl :sup:`-` H\ :sup:`+` and OH\ :sup:`-` information must be supplied. Otherwise an error will be thrown.

Information regarding the property package this unit model relies on can be found here: 

> :py:mod:`watertap.property_models.ion_DSPMDE_prop_pack`

Reviewer 4: What property model is this referring to? I don't see anything with this name in the repo. If documentation exists for this prop pack, we should link it here rather than citing like this

Equations
---------

This model solves mass balances of all solution components (H\ :sub:`2`\ O, Na :sup:`+`, \Cl :sup:`-` H\ :sup:`+` and OH\ :sup:`-` ) on three control volumes (acidic, basic, and diluate channels). Under the 1D treatment, balance equations are expressed
as differential algebraic equations (DAE) when concerned variables are functions of length (x). The DAEs are solved in a
discretization manner using the "finite difference" or "collocation" method implemented in **Pyomo.DAE**.

> To create a model for bipolar electrodialysis we use the mass transfer equations from conventional electrodialysis on the CEM and AEM

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To create a model for bipolar electrodialysis, we use the mass transfer equations from conventional electrodialysis on the CEM and AEM
```

> (for further details please refer to :py:mod:`watertap.unit_models.electrodialysis_1D`) and couple it with equations developed for BPEM.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
(for further details please refer to `Electrodialysis 1D <ED_1D>`) and couple it with equations developed for BPEM.
```

> Across the BPEM, water disassociation occurs when the limiting current is exceeded. Assuming the unit model is operated in the hydrolysis regime the current density consists of

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Across the BPEM, water disassociation occurs when the limiting current is exceeded. Assuming the unit model is operated in the hydrolysis regime, the current density consists of
```

the limiting current and the water splitting current. See equation (3) in  Wilhelm et al. (2001) [7]_ or equations (11) and (12) from González et al. (2023) [13]_ for further details.
The limiting current density is obtained from González et al. (2023) [13]_. It sets the amount of salt ions flowing across the BPEM. The governing equations for catalyst induced
water disassociation is derived from the model proposed by Mareev et al. (2020) [5]_. The equations pertaining to the BPEM have been presented in **Table 3**.

> .. csv-table:: **Table 3** Essential equations across BPEM

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.. csv-table::
```

>    :header: "Description", "Equation"

Reviewer 4: Missing a column heading for the 3rd column... something like Condition?

   "Depletion length \ :sup:`5`", ":math:`\lambda(x) = E(x) \epsilon_0 \epsilon_r / (F \sigma)`"
   "Hydrolysis voltage drop", ":math:`u_{diss}(x) = E(x) \lambda(x)`"
   "Electric current density \ :sup:`6`", ":math:`i(x) = i_{lim}(x) + F S_{diss}(x)`"
   "Potential drop", ":math:`U(x)=n E(x)/\lambda(x) + i(x) r_{tot}(x)`"

**Note**
 :sup:`1` The diffusivity :math:`D^*` used here for the salt and should not be confused with the ion diffusivity.

 :sup:`2` The limiting current density is set by balance of electrical migration and diffusion and obtained from equation (15) in González et al. (2023) [13]_.

 :sup:`3` Water disassociation flux is obtained from equation (35) in Mareev et al. (2020) [5]_.

 :sup:`4` Hydrolysis rate with catalyst present is obtained from equation (16) in Mareev et al. (2020) after neglecting the recombination, in line with the approximation made later in their derivation [5]_.

 :sup:`5` The relationship between the electric field at the junction of the bipolar membrane's charged layers :math:`E`  to the depletion layer has been derived from equations (26-27) in Melnikov (2022) [8]_.

>  :sup:`6` Total current density has been obtained from equation (3) in  Wilhelm et al. (2001) [7]_. Alternatively please refer to equations (11) and (12) from González et al. (2023) [13]_.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 :sup:`6` Total current density has been obtained from equation (3) in  Wilhelm et al. (2001) [7]_. Alternatively, please refer to equations (11) and (12) from González et al. (2023) [13]_.
```

> Please note that since the unit model is assumed to operate in the water splitting regime. Hence :math:`i_{lim}` is always computed since hydrolysis current is the portion that is in excess of the limiting current.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Please note that the unit model is assumed to operate in the water splitting regime. Hence, :math:`i_{lim}` is always computed since hydrolysis current is the portion that is in excess of the limiting current.
```

> Below the water splitting regime the bipolar membrane behaves like a conventional ion exchange membrane, albeit with much lower mass transfer. Most cases do not operate in this regime [2]_ [3]_ [4]_.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Below the water splitting regime, the bipolar membrane behaves like a conventional ion exchange membrane, albeit with much lower mass transfer. Most cases do not operate in this regime [2]_ [3]_ [4]_.
```

> Hence the sub-limiting case has not been implemented in this unit model. :math:`f[E]` is the second Wien effect driven enhancement of the dissociation rate under applied electric field.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Hence, the sub-limiting case has not been implemented in this unit model. :math:`f[E]` is the second Wien effect driven enhancement of the dissociation rate under applied electric field.
```

> It requires as input temperature and relative permittivity (:math:`\epsilon_r`) and the full expression has been obtained from Mareev et al. (2020) [5]_. While water is consumed during hydrolysis there is an

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It requires input temperature and relative permittivity (:math:`\epsilon_r`), and the full expression has been obtained from Mareev et al. (2020) [5]_. While water is consumed during hydrolysis, there is an
```

> also transport across the membrane. For this component we use the equations from conventional electrodialysis.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
also transport across the membrane. For this component, we use the equations from conventional electrodialysis.
```

**Table 4** shows the fluxes on each membrane. The positive direction for the mass fluxes :math:`J`  is from cathode to anode.

> The water dissociation fluxes :math:`S` flow out from the central depletion region of the bipolar membrane while water is drawn in. Here the convention is outflow from the bipolar membrane is the positive direction.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The water dissociation fluxes, :math:`S`, flow out from the central depletion region of the bipolar membrane while water is drawn in. Here, the convention is that the outflow from the bipolar membrane is in the positive direction.
```

Appropriately combining the various fluxes and assigning them to the channels the results are presented in **Table 5**.

> .. csv-table:: **Table 4** Flux Equations

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

Flux Equations
----------------
.. csv-table::
```

   :header: "Description", "Equation", "Index set"

>    "mass transfer flux, BPEM, ions", ":math:`J^{BPEM}_j(x) = t_j^{BPEM}\frac{\xi i_{lim}(x)}{ z_j F}`", ":math:`j \in \left['{Na^+} ', '{Cl^-}', '{H^+} ', '{OH^-} '\right]`"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   "Mass transfer flux, BPEM, ions", ":math:`J^{BPEM}_j(x) = t_j^{BPEM}\frac{\xi i_{lim}(x)}{ z_j F}`", ":math:`j \in \left['{Na^+} ', '{Cl^-}', '{H^+} ', '{OH^-} '\right]`"
```

>    "mass transfer flux, BPEM, H\ :sub:`2`\ O", ":math:`J^{BPEM}_j(x) = t_w^{BPEM} \left(\frac{i(x)}{F}\right)+\left(L^{BPEM} \right)\left(p_{osm}^{acidic}(x)-p_{osm}^{basic}(x) \right)\left(\frac{\rho_w}{M_w}\right)`", ":math:`j \in \left['H_2 O'\right]`"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   "Mass transfer flux, BPEM, H\ :sub:`2`\ O", ":math:`J^{BPEM}_j(x) = t_w^{BPEM} \left(\frac{i(x)}{F}\right)+\left(L^{BPEM} \right)\left(p_{osm}^{acidic}(x)-p_{osm}^{basic}(x) \right)\left(\frac{\rho_w}{M_w}\right)`", ":math:`j \in \left['H_2 O'\right]`"
```

   "Water disassociation flux, BPEM, ions", ":math:`S^{BPEM}_j (x)= S_{diss}(x)`", ":math:`j \in \left['{H^+}, {OH^-}  '\right]`"
   "", ":math:`S^{BPEM}_j (x)= 0`", ":math:`j \in \left['{Na^+} ', '{Cl^-}'\right]`"
   "Water disassociation flux, BPEM, H\ :sub:`2`\ O", ":math:`S^{BPEM}_j(x) = -0.5 S_{diss}(x)`", ":math:`j \in \left['H_2 O'\right]`"

>    "mass transfer flux, CEM, ions", ":math:`J^{AEM}_j(x) = \left(t_j^{AEM} \right)\frac{\xi i(x)}{ z_j F}-\frac{D_j^{AEM}}{\delta ^{AEM} }\left(c_j^{acidic}(x)-c_j^{diluate}(x) \right)`", ":math:`j \in \left['{Na^+} ', '{Cl^-}', '{H^+} ', '{OH^-} '\right]`"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   "Mass transfer flux, CEM, ions", ":math:`J^{AEM}_j(x) = \left(t_j^{AEM} \right)\frac{\xi i(x)}{ z_j F}-\frac{D_j^{AEM}}{\delta ^{AEM} }\left(c_j^{acidic}(x)-c_j^{diluate}(x) \right)`", ":math:`j \in \left['{Na^+} ', '{Cl^-}', '{H^+} ', '{OH^-} '\right]`"
```

>    "mass transfer flux, AEM, H\ :sub:`2`\ O", ":math:`J^{AEM}_j(x) = t_w^{AEM} \left(\frac{i(x)}{F}\right)+\left(L^{AEM} \right)\left(p_{osm}^{acidic}(x)-p_{osm}^{diluate}(x) \right)\left(\frac{\rho_w}{M_w}\right)`", ":math:`j \in \left['H_2 O'\right]`"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   "Mass transfer flux, AEM, H\ :sub:`2`\ O", ":math:`J^{AEM}_j(x) = t_w^{AEM} \left(\frac{i(x)}{F}\right)+\left(L^{AEM} \right)\left(p_{osm}^{acidic}(x)-p_{osm}^{diluate}(x) \right)\left(\frac{\rho_w}{M_w}\right)`", ":math:`j \in \left['H_2 O'\right]`"
```

>    "mass transfer flux, CEM, ions", ":math:`J^{CEM}_j(x) = \left(t_j^{CEM} \right)\frac{\xi i(x)}{ z_j F}-\frac{D_j^{CEM}}{\delta ^{CEM} }\left(c_j^{basic}(x)-c_j^{diluate}(x) \right)`", ":math:`j \in \left['{Na^+} ', '{Cl^-}', '{H^+} ', '{OH^-} '\right]`"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   "Mass transfer flux, CEM, ions", ":math:`J^{CEM}_j(x) = \left(t_j^{CEM} \right)\frac{\xi i(x)}{ z_j F}-\frac{D_j^{CEM}}{\delta ^{CEM} }\left(c_j^{basic}(x)-c_j^{diluate}(x) \right)`", ":math:`j \in \left['{Na^+} ', '{Cl^-}', '{H^+} ', '{OH^-} '\right]`"
```

>    "mass transfer flux, CEM, H\ :sub:`2`\ O", ":math:`J^{CEM}_j(x) = t_w^{CEM} \left(\frac{i(x)}{F}\right)+\left(L^{CEM} \right)\left(p_{osm}^{basic}(x)-p_{osm}^{diluate}(x) \right)\left(\frac{\rho_w}{M_w}\right)`", ":math:`j \in \left['H_2 O'\right]`"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   "Mass transfer flux, CEM, H\ :sub:`2`\ O", ":math:`J^{CEM}_j(x) = t_w^{CEM} \left(\frac{i(x)}{F}\right)+\left(L^{CEM} \right)\left(p_{osm}^{basic}(x)-p_{osm}^{diluate}(x) \right)\left(\frac{\rho_w}{M_w}\right)`", ":math:`j \in \left['H_2 O'\right]`"
```

> .. csv-table:: **Table 5** Mass balance equations

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Mass Balance Equations
--------------------------
.. csv-table:: **Table 5** Mass balance equations
```

   :header: "Description", "Equation", "Index set"

   "Mass balance **basic** channel", ":math:`\left(\frac{\partial N_j (x)}{\partial x}\right)^{\bf{basic}}+(-J_j(x)^{BPEM} + J_j(x)^{CEM} + S_j(x)^{BPEM} ) b=0`", ":math:`j \in \left['H_2 O', '{Na^+} ', '{Cl^-}', '{H^+} ', '{OH^-} '\right]`"
   "Mass balance **acidic** channel", ":math:`\left(\frac{\partial N_j (x)}{\partial x}\right)^{\bf{acidic}}+(J_j(x)^{BPEM} + J_j(x)^{AEM} + S_j(x)^{BPEM} ) b=0`", ":math:`j \in \left['H_2 O', '{Na^+} ', '{Cl^-}', '{H^+} ', '{OH^-} '\right]`"
   "Mass balance **diluate** channel", ":math:`\left(\frac{\partial N_j (x)}{\partial x}\right)^{\bf{diluate}}-(J_j(x)^{AEM} + J_j(x)^{CEM}) b=0`", ":math:`j \in \left['H_2 O', '{Na^+} ', '{Cl^-}', '{H^+} ', '{OH^-} '\right]`"

> The flux and potential drop on the bipolar membrane are tested against the experimental data available from Wilhelm et al. (2002) [6]_ and we find reasonably good agreement.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The flux and potential drop on the bipolar membrane are tested against the experimental data available from Wilhelm et al. (2002), [6]_ and we find reasonably good agreement.
```

> Some key inputs for the validation were obtained from Mareev et al. (2020) [5]_. :math:`K_A` is not readily available and so determined by best fit.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Some key inputs for the validation were obtained from Mareev et al. (2020) [5]_. :math:`K_A` is not readily available, so it is determined by best fit.
```

The mass transfer flux employs the well tested conventional electrodialysis framework. Hence, robust predictions of bipolar electrodialysis operation is expected.
Some of the key operational and performance metrics are given in **Table 6**.

> .. csv-table:: **Table 6** Electrical and Performance Equations

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Electrical and Performance Equations
.. csv-table::
```

All equations are coded as "constraints" (Pyomo). Isothermal and isobaric conditions apply.

The model has been validated against the experimental data available from Wilhelm et al. (2002) [6]_,bipolar membrane information available online: Fumatech, Technical Data Sheet for
Fumasep FBM, 2020 [10]_ (additional inputs were obtained from from  Ionescu, Viorel (2023) [11]_) and bench scale experimental data provided by the New Mexico State University team.

Frictional pressure drop
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
This model can optionally calculate pressured drops along the flow path in the diluate and concentrate channels through
config ``has_pressure_change`` and ``pressure_drop_method``.  Under the assumption of identical diluate and concentrate
channels and starting flow rates, the flow velocities in the two channels are approximated equal and invariant over the
channel length when calculating the frictional pressure drops. This approximation is based on the evaluation that the
actual velocity variation over the channel length caused by water mass transfer across the consecutive channels leads to

> negligible errors as compared to the uncertainties carried by the frictional pressure method itself. **Table 7** gives

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
negligible errors, as compared to the uncertainties carried by the frictional pressure method itself. **Table 7** gives
```

essential equations to simulate the pressure drop. Among extensive literatures using these equations, a good reference
paper is by Wright et. al., 2018 [12]_.

> .. csv-table:: **Table 7** Essential equations supporting the pressure drop calculation

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Essential Pressure Drop Equations
.. csv-table::
```

   "Reynold number", ":math:`Re=\frac{\rho v d_H}{\mu}`", "`has_pressure_change == True` or `limiting_current_density_method == LimitingCurrentDensityMethod.Theoretical`"
   "Schmidt number", ":math:`Sc=\frac{\mu}{\rho D_b}`", "`has_pressure_change == True` or `limiting_current_density_method == LimitingCurrentDensityMethod.Theoretical`"
   "Sherwood number", ":math:`Sh=0.29Re^{0.5}Sc^{0.33}`", "`has_pressure_change == True` or `limiting_current_density_method == LimitingCurrentDensityMethod.Theoretical`"
   "Darcy's frictional factor", ":math:`f=4\times 50.6\epsilon^{-7.06}Re^{-1}`", "`friction_factor_method == FrictionFactorMethod.Gurreri`"
   " ", ":math:`f=4\times 9.6 \epsilon^{-1} Re^{-0.5}`", "`friction_factor_method == FrictionFactorMethod.Kuroda`"
   "Pressure balance", ":math:`p_{in}-p_L l =p_{out}`", "`has_pressure_change == True`"

**Note**

 :sup:`1` As discussed in the last paragraph, in this section we assumed a constant linear velocity (in the cell length direction), :math:`v`, in both channels and along the flow path. This :math:`v` is calculated from the volume flow rate at :math:`x=0` by the property package.

Nomenclature
------------

> .. csv-table:: **Table 8** Nomenclature

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.. csv-table::
```
